---
title: "Lexical Semantics: Ambiguity vs Vagueness"
date: 2024-08-01
draft: false
garden_tags: ["Semantics", "Linguistics"]
summary: "The distinction between two important terms in lexical semantics."
status: "growing"
---

We tend to avoid having truly synonymous lexical items, that is, words. That's how we organise our lexicon, we don't want to overload it. They will be stored under slightly different meanings, different contexts, different register, and so on.
The forms that appear in a Thesaurus as "synonymous" will tend to still be used in different contexts or have variations in meaning. 

Lexical ambiguity occurs when there are multiple acceptable interpretations for a given word, but these interpretations do not share a common meaning:
* A river **bank**.
* I'm putting money in the **bank**. 

Whereas lexical vagueness occurs when it is possible for a word to have a common definition but have variation in the details:
* My **cousin** brought a cake, **she** made it herself.
* My **cousin** brought a cake, **he** made it himself.

In order to distinguish ambiguity from vagueness, there are three tests we as speakers can implement. They are sensitive to whether there are separate meanings (ambiguity) or one vague expression (vagueness).

#### Logical Test of Contradiction
The logical test of contradiction requires that you form a sentence which may contradict itself with a statement and its negation. If the statement can be acceptable it is ambiguity, and if it cannot be acceptable then it is vagueness.
For instance:
* This is a bank, but not a bank. (this is a river bank, not a financial institution)
* \*I have an aunt, but I do not have an aunt. (I have an aunt which is my father's sister, not one which is my mother's sister).

The first shows us lexical *ambiguity* as the sentence is acceptable given the correct context, where a person is indicating that something is a bank of a river but not the financial institution. The second sentence is proven *vagueness*. There is no context where it is acceptable due to the fact that a common definition can be found between the two intended meanings (one being your father's sister and the other being your mother's sister).

#### Definition Test
The definition test requires that you try to find a common definition between two given lexical items. If a common definition can be found, then there may be vagueness. If not, then ambiguity can occur.

* Word: Cousin
  * Definition 1: Your parent's sibling's daughter.
  * Definition 2: Your parent's sibling's son.
  * Commmon Definition: Your parent's sibling's child.

#### Identity Test
This test makes use of the fact that an anaphoric term (i.e one which makes reference to a previous word) and the word its referring to must have the same meaning. For instance, "the teacher **gave us** some chocolate, **so** did the headmaster" is an anaphoric sentence. This is often exploited in order to make puns for instance. If an anaphoric sentence can be constructed with two given terms, then they must share a common definition and therefore must be subject to vagueness. Terms which may be ambiguous cannot form anaphorici sentences and therefore fail the identity test.